---
title: The Trip of a Lifetime
author: "Colton J. McCurdy"
date: 2019-05-25
tags: ["hawaii", "vacation", "friends", "2019"]
posts: ["The Trip of a Lifetime"]
---

## Why did we want to travel?

There were a few key reasons for traveling and the vacation in general. First,
my wife completed her Master's program and this was a way to celebrate her amazing
work. Second, unlimited vacation often leads to less vacation than if the number
of paid time off was explicit and if I don't take occasional breaks, I will burn
out. It is also good to step away and consider all that you have accomplished and
assess whether your path is aligning with your goals. Finally, to experience a
place with a different culture than home.

### Why did we choose Hawaii?

If I remember correctly, I suggested that we visit Seattle. My wife, being a
fan of warm and sunny beaches had other places in mind. A friend spoke very highly
of Hawaii, saying that it literally changed his life. He even signed a phone contract
while there to get an 808 area code for his phone. Also, my mom visited Hawaii when
she was young and mentioned it a few times. We never talked about it in detail or
saw pictures. I just talked to my aunt to see if she had any pictures. She couldn't
remember much about my mom's trip either (she didn't go). All that she could remember
was that she visited the [King Kamehameha Statue](https://www.gohawaii.com/islands/oahu/regions/honolulu/king-kamehameha-statue).
Which after a little research doesn't help much because there are four of these statues,
two on the island of Hawaii, one in Oahu and one in Washington, DC. The final reason
was to go somewhere that we could enjoy the beauty of nature. Somewhere that had
beaches as well as mountains, as I wanted to do some hiking. Hawaii is also known
for its Kona coffee. Being a coffee fan, I would be lying if I didn't at least mention
that this influenced my decision a bit.

## Overview of our trip

After booking the trip, I started watching videos on YouTube and one channel that
had great videos and that were super informative with a good description was [Preston and Krista](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCkIADRl3jDLuSGmd2O1a23A).
We got a lot of inspiration from these videos, but didn't do everything that they
did and did a few things that they didn't do. I would strongly encourage this as
a starting point and do the things that interest you, but also leave time to adventure
and find parts of Hawaii that are beautiful to you.

I'm a big coffee fan and I definitely wanted to check out the cool coffee shops, so
you will see that reflected in the overview of our trip. In Preston and Krista's
video of Kauai, they visited a coffee shop, namely Rainbeau Jo's that looked really
cool and that I wanted to visit, but after checking out there social media and website,
we found out that they were temporarily closed [(something about their landlord or lot lease)](https://www.rainbeaujos.com/the-bay-kauai)
while they build out a more permanent location.

The highlight of the trip was on our third day on Maui, when we decided to take
a trip to [Haleakala National Park](https://www.gohawaii.com/islands/maui/regions/upcountry-maui/haleakala-national-park).
We didn't have plans to go on any long hikes or stay for the sunset. On our way
to Haleakala, we stopped to pick up a few snacks (chocolate and peanut butter covered pretzels,
gold fish and wheat thins) and drinks (32oz water and vitamin water) because there
are no places to eat in the national park and we expected to be there through lunch.

We made it to the Halemau’u Trailhead, which was one of the first visible parking
lots and there was a man --- we later found out his name was Jose --- who looked
like a tour guide, standing near the sign, so we rolled our window down. He asked
us where we were going, to which we responded that we really didn't have any plans
nor did we really know what to do. Then, Jose started describing the possible trails/hikes
that you could do, but that there was one in particular that many people did, the
11.2 mile hike from the Sliding Sands Trailhead, near the Pu'u'ula'ula summit, to
where we currently were, the Halemau’u Trailhead. We were pretty certain that we
would not be able to do an 11 mile hike. We are active, but have never hiked before,
didn't come fully prepared and 11 miles seemed fairly long for a first hike. Either
way, Jose was wondering if we could give him and his wife a ride to the Sliding Sands
Trailhead, where they would be starting their hike.

On the roughly 3-5 mile drive to the Sliding Sands Trailhead, we introduced ourselves
and Jose and his wife, Paulina introduced theirselves. We asked where they were from
and they said Columbia and they asked we were from, we said "Pennsylvania", they
said, "Where is Pennsylvania?!" and we replied, "Near Pittsburgh." and they said,
"No way!" and that they were originally from Columbia, but that they had moved to
the United States for college and then later got jobs in Pittsburgh.

I knew that I wanted to do the hike, even though I wasn't entirely convinced that
we were prepared, but I knew that I would have to convince Meghan, my wife, to do
it. Surprisingly, she was pretty easy to convince.

Then, I started asking Jose more about the hike and he started asking us questions
like, "Are you active? Did you come prepared? Do you have at least 2L of water per
person?", to which we responded, "Yes, we work out and can easily
run 5 miles and that yes, we stopped on the way and picked up liquids.", but then,
I pointed to my shorts and Luna sandals (which by the way are made for running and
hiking. Luckily, I wasn't wearing my Birkenstocks). They were both wearing
wind-breakers (we were also wearing sweatshirts and windbreakers because we knew
it would be breezy at the summit), long pants and hiking boots. He seemed pretty
concerned that I wanted to do the hike in my sandals.

I would be lying if I told you that I wasn't concerned that wearing sandals would be
the wrong decision, I did have some comfort knowing that I had completed a 7 mile
run in them and had been wearing them for about a month at that point so I had them
properly adjusted and molded to my feet. While on the hike there were two incidents
that did involve me wearing shorts and sandals. First, there is no shade on the
Sliding Sands trail, you are walking in terrain that looks like Mars, so the sun
was beating down and I was worried that I would have some pretty bad burns. Fortunately,
we brought lots of sunscreen (see, we weren't that unprepared). Second, about 2 miles
into the hike, my right heel slipped out from above the sole of my sandals while walking
down Sliding Sands and I stepped on a sharp, coral-looking rock and it cut my foot
a little. It was bleeding and my heel later did feel bruised, so I was walking
exclusively on the ball of my foot for the rest of the hike.

https://winterbear.com/trip-reports/backpacking-haleakala-crater/

## A few tips

+ dont rent a jeep (unless you really want it)
    + there was only one point where I wish we had a jeep (off-road beach)
    + jeep would have made the trip to hana much more difficult
+ honestly, I would suggest renting the smallest, cheapest car
    + most locals on maui and kauai drove older cars with sun-damaged paint
    + it was actually super easy to pick out locals (drove older nissans and small ranger-like trucks)
      from tourists (drove clean, new mid-tier cars e.g., chevy malibu, ford fusion, etc)
+ the expiditions feel over-priced and tourist-y
    + i understand that people make a living from these businesses and people are willing to pay the price
    + but if you are on the edge about paying it, skip them
    + you can do most things yourself anyway (e.g., road to hana, sunset at haleakala)
+ a lot of the experiences worth doing (in terms of time) are free or very cheap
    + beaches in hawaii are open to the public
    + there was even a beach with green sea turtles (people swimming, nothing that the ranger could do)
    + haleakala hike (\$25 national park fee)
        + this is what we paid
        + http://mauiwatch.com/2018/04/haleakala-national-park-changes-entrance-fees-to-address-infrastructure-needs-improve-visitor-experience/
        + this goes toward covering field trips for kids
        + restoring park trails
        + visitor center improvements (restrooms, parking lots, etc)
        + controlling invasive species
        + definitely worth it and goes to good use
        + I would be willing to pay much, much more (e.g., the price of an excursion)
            + this was cheaper than a single meal
        + actually the receipt allowed you to enter the park for 3 days (road to hana)
    + on kaui some of the trails had minimal fees
        + help preserve the trail
        + keep track of how many visitors
+ just experience it because pictures and videos dont do it justice
    + im not saying dont take pictures, etc., just that unless you are a professional, they arent going to do a great job of displaying the beauty

