---
title: "ZDF DFW Interview"
description: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iGLzWdT7vGc"
author: ""
date: 2026-01-21T08:47:45-05:00
subtitle: ""
image: ""
post-tags: ["DFW"]
posts: []
draft: false
---

- Interviewer: Do you think that is something that is true? That humor can only come out of something sad? I know that Wittgenstein believed that the most serious and profound problems and questions and issues could be discussed only in the form of jokes. I know in U.S. literature there is a tradition from about the 50s and 60s called "black humor, which is a very sardonic, sad type of humor. I'm grasping for something interesting to say in response. I think probably sometimes it can be and sometimes it isn't. There are forms of humor that offer escapes from pain. And there are forms of humor that transfigure pain.
  Interviewer: Because in your books ... Does that make any sense? Interviewer: Yeah. Definitely. Now the perspiration starts. Okay. You know what would help me? Tell me what you think. If we do this as a conversation it will be easier for me. Interviewer: Yeah, sure. And, you know, I wrote my Master's Thesis about Thomas Bernhard. And Thomas Bernhard has a theory that you know, he was very, he had this lung sickness so he couldn't breathe all his life.
  His life was very hard for him. He also hated Austria, where he lived. He thought they were all Nazis. There was all this Catholic fascism. He was just hating everything, but out of that he developed this really strange sense of humor. His novels are very dark, but at the same time, for me, very witty. This humor comes from some sort of music and all that. I just wanted to know if you think that is true— that the kind of sense of humor that you like comes out of this bitterness and sadness.
  The answer for myself is I don’t know. I know that very often, humor is a response to things that are difficult. In the U.S., there’s a strange situation where in some respects, humor and irony are political responses and they’re reductive. In another sense, particularly in popular entertainment, irony and a kind of dark humor can become a way of—it’s pretending to protest when it really isn’t.
  Someone once called irony the song of a bird that has come to love its cage. Even though it sings about not liking the cage, it really likes it in there. So it can be both a wake-up call and an anesthetic. The difference in the U.S. now is Very tricky and very complicated, it seems to me. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcnjhf4b0kwxzvxta2yq7z))

- Interviewer: And what would you think is true for your books? For me, they raise very serious questions. And they are often very sad, but at the same time you get a sense of humor in there somehow. I'm not often all that aware of what's really funny in the book. In the American version of "Infinite Jest," I set out to write a sad book. And when people liked it and told me the thing they liked about it was that it was so funny, it was just very surprising.
  It's the other strange thing about humor. I teach school and I teach literature and some of what I teach is Kafka. And there's a story about Kafka, that in some of Kafka's most horrific stories, his neighbors would complain, because he would be laughing so hard late at night, as he wrote these stories. He found them very, very funny and there are things in them that are funny, but I don't know that many people would understand laughing so hard that your neighbors would complain. So there's something. It's probably difficult to talk to a writer about the humor or sadness or something in their own work, because our sense of it tends to be very different from readers.
  Interviewer: Yeah, but there was one interview you gave, I forgot which media it was, but you said, when you began writing, "Infinite Jest," you wanted to write something about sadness. So sadness was something that really belonged to this project. Could you describe it? It was a while ago. The easiest way to talk about it would be that for the upper-middle class in the US, particularly younger people, things are often, materially, very comfortable.
  Yet there's often a great sadness and emptiness. It's difficult to think about and hard to come up with answers in the abstract. I think I had started that book after a couple of people, not close friends, but people I knew who were my age had committed suicide. It just became obvious that something was going on. So I know that that impulse was part of starting the book. The book is so long, though; it took so long to write, that it's almost hard to remember the impulses at the beginning, because everything sort of changes. It's something you live with for years, rather than something that you just have an idea or a feeling.
  And you just do. I think one of the ideas in the book is that there's a particular ethos in U.S. culture, especially in entertainment and marketing culture. That very much appeals to people as individuals, that you don't have to be devoted or subservient to anything else. There is no larger good than your own good and your own happiness.
  And in the book, as best I can recall, characters who become drug addicts— there is a form, that the root in English of "addict" is the Latin, "addicere," which means religious devotion. It was an attribute of beginning monks, I think.
  There's an element in the book in which various people are living out something that, I think, is true, which is that we all worship and we all have a religious impulse. We can choose to an extent what we worship, but the myth that we worship nothing and give ourselves away to nothing simply sets us up to give ourselves away to something different.
  For instance, pleasure or drugs, or the idea of having a lot of money and being able to buy nice stuff or in the tennis academy, It's somewhat different.
  It's devotion to an athletic pursuit that requires a certain amount of sacrifice and discipline, but is nevertheless an individual sport and one is trying to get ahead as an individual. I doubt this makes very much sense, but whatever the conditions of hopelessness you’re talking about, at least in "Infinite Jest," have to do, I think, with an American idea, and not a universal one, but one that I think kids get exposed to very early. That you are the most important and what you want is the most important and that your job in life is to gratify your own desires. That’s a little crude to say it that way, but in fact it’s something of the ideology here. And it’s certainly the ideology that’s perpetrated by television, advertising, and entertainment, and the economy thrives on it. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcp6jbj0jjq66e51mfp3b4))

- Interviewer: And what happens when this ideology becomes — Sound Guy: Sorry, sorry. Interviewer: Oh, was there ... Oh, am I? Oh, god, sorry. Sound Guy: I got to switch this battery out. Shit, I was halfway lucid for a second there too. And it probably didn’t come through? Sound Guy: No, it was fine.
  I was feeling lucid. Sound Guy: I promise, it was fine. Sound Guy: Yeah, it went out for just the last question there. Sound Guy: But it's kind of hard because he moves in and out. I move in and out? Sound Guy: Oh yeah. Interviewer: You know, the thing is, the background is not too pretty. Interviewer: Of course, and that's why we're not showing — I'm sorry. Interviewer and Sound Guy: No, no, no. That's cool. That's okay. Sound Guy: Because you're pontificating.
  Oh, thank you. There's a nice word. Sound Guy: In a very deep, spiritual way. Thank you. Sound Guy: Okay? Which is completely screwing me. [Laughter from Interviewer and Sound Guy] Sound Guy: Okay? That's a king. Sound Guy: You are, you're just, I can tell, you're very ... Twitchy. I'm sorry? Sound Guy: You're very reflective. Well, these are hard questions. Particularly when it's about something you did seven years ago. Sound Guy: Okay. I just shoot the pictures. Yeah. I would trade places with you at this moment. [Laughter] Sound Guy: Any time. Interviewer: What do you think? Interviewer: What do you think?
  Does this ideology, when children are told from the beginning everything that counts as your own happiness and your own pursuit of satisfaction? Well, of course, nobody tells you. I mean, mom and dad don’t sit you down and say this. This is something very subtle and is delivered by a great many messages. Just conversationally, do you get what I’m talking about? I rather doubt that European’s idea of America is very different from this.
  This is one enormous engine and temple of self-gratification and self-advancement. And in some ways, it works very, very well. In other ways, it doesn’t work all that well, because, at least for me, it seems as if there are whole other parts of me that need to worry about things larger than me that don’t get nourished in that system.
  Interviewer: And do you think the Europeans know that? From the Europeans I’ve talked to, yeah. When I get in arguments with Europeans it’s that their view of it is sort of exaggerated and simplistic. It’s a very complicated thing and full of paradoxes, ironies, and all kinds of stuff. And the idea that America is one great big shopping mall and that all anyone wants to do is grasp their credit card and run out and buy stuff is a stereotype and it’s a generalization.
  But as a way to summarize a certain kind of ethos in the U.S., it's pretty accurate. Particularly after the elections we just had on Tuesday, the U.S. is not getting better in this area. It seems like it's getting worse.
  Interviewer: I've been coming here every year over the last couple of years, and it seemed, for me, I seemed to see some progress in that. This development.
  When you go to a department store, people seem more aggressive in trying to sell you stuff. Yeah.
  Interviewer: On the other hand, I like it here because, I mean, I'm German, it's not that funny too. It's not that what? Interviewer: Not that funny all the time too. Yeah. Yeah. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcpdf39x9r94h5absjvmbk))

- Interviewer: And also an intellectual crisis and everything. It stands still somehow. There are certain paradoxes that go along with being a wealthy Western industrial country, and it just seems that they're probably somewhat common. We have our race problems. You have the problems of absorbing East Germany and dealing with all that stuff. I'll stay out of politics; it's too upsetting. [laughter] Interviewer: What's also in this interview I read is that you said you wanted to write something about a generation.
  I mean, you weren't sure if you were right about this generation. But you somehow had that feeling that your generation was in that kind of trouble. Well, my memory is that one of the reasons for setting the book in the future is that I’m now 40, so I was born in the early 60s and, to an extent, I think my generation tends to think of itself as children still, and as people with parents. I remember wanting to do something about what would be the situation of our children, kind of in the next generation.
  Interviewer: And this child-like thing also has something. There's one story in "Interviews with Hideous Men", where the oppressed person is always talking about the woman and the child. Is that something that belongs together? Or is this ... Language like that, the wounded inner child, the inner pain is part of a kind of pop psychological movement.
  In the United States, there is a sort of popular Freudianism that has its own paradox, which is that the more we are taught to list and resent the things we were deprived of as children, the more we live in that anger and frustration, and the more we remain children. That's a very simple way of putting it, but I think the character in that story is sort of a compendium of all the worst and most painful features of the popular psychology movement in the U.S. And I don't know whether there's any analog to that in Western Europe or not.
  Interviewer: I think there is, actually. And when you said that, I find that too, in Europe, that there is this reluctance to really grow up and to live life on its terms. What should this generation, which is not able to grow up, do about it?
  Let me insert one thing: I’ll bet you’ve noticed from talking to writers that most of the stuff that we think we’re writing about in books is very difficult to talk about straight out. You know, question and answer. In some sense, it probably can’t be talked about directly, and that’s why people make up stories about it.
  This is all a big defense, because I feel like what I'm saying is so simple and so reductive. To the extent that I understand it, being what you call "grown-up" isn't a lot of fun a lot of the time. There are things you have to do. There are things you want to do that you can't do for a variety of reasons.
  I think for young people in America, there are very mixed messages from the culture. There's a streak of moralism in American life that extols the virtues of being grown up, having a family, and being a responsible citizen, but there's also the sense of doing what you want, gratifying your appetites, because when I'm a corporation, appealing to the parts of you that are selfish and self-centered and want to have fun all the time is the best way to sell you things. Right?
  And the point that emerges from that is ... that it's, I think, one more example of the American ... American economic and cultural systems that work very well in terms of selling people products and keeping the economy thriving, do not work as well when it comes to educating children or helping us help each other know how to live and be happy.
  If that word means anything. Clearly it means something different from whatever I want to do. I want to take this cup and throw it right now. I have every right to. I should. We see it with children. That's not happiness. That feeling of having to obey every impulse And gratify every desire.
  It seems to me to be a strange kind of slavery. Nobody talks about it as such, though. It talks about the freedom of choice, and you have the right to have things and spend this much money, and you can have this stuff. Again, saying it this way, it sounds to me very crude and very simple, but that’s sort of the way. Does this make any sense to you? Interviewer: Absolutely. And I’m not lying or something. I would tell you.
  But I mean, you've spent time in the U.S.? Is this something — Interviewer: Yes. But I think it's not only a problem in the U.S., because everything, you know, that happens here is copied by people in Germany, and there is always this impulse that you only have to do what makes you happy and forget about all the others. And you don’t want to be with boring people, people who need you. And that’s not attractive and all that. So it’s more or less the same thing, so it makes sense to me, of course. And it works very well as a system for running an economy and keeping goods produced and sold. It works wonderfully. The ways in which it doesn’t work are much more difficult to talk about. Interviewer: So, speaking of that, where doesn’t it work? Once reduced to talking about general terms, like being grown-up. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcpnarr1vtke2ksaba3naf))

- Or a term that's rarely used here anymore. And see, now I feel embarrassment, because I’m going to sound like my grandfather or something. But the word, "citizen," the idea of being a citizen, it would be to understand your country's history and the things about it that are good and not so good and how the system works. It involves taking the trouble to learn about candidates for political office, which often means reading material that isn’t fun. Sometimes it’s boring. But when people don’t do that, here’s what happens: The candidates win who have the most money to buy television advertisements, because television advertisements are all most voters know about the candidates. Therefore, we get candidates who are beholden to large donors and become, in some ways, corrupt, which disgusts the voters and makes the voters even less interested in politics and less willing to read and do the work of citizenship.
  When I was a little boy, there was a class called "citizenship." Here are certain things about America and America's history. Here’s why it’s important to vote. Here’s why it’s important not to just go in and vote for who the best-looking candidate is. Here’s what’s really interesting, and I don’t know if you can translate this: Talking about this now, I feel ashamed, because my saying all this sounds to me like an older person saying this, like a person lecturing, which in American culture sets me up to be ridiculed. It would be very easy to make fun of what I’m saying. It would be very easy to make fun of what I’m saying and I can hear in my head a voice making fun of this stuff as I’m saying it. And this is the kind of paradox, I think, Of what it is to be a halfway intelligent American right now and probably also a Western European.
  There are things we know are right and good and would be better for us to do, but constantly it's like, yeah, but you know it's so much funnier and nicer to go do something else. And who cares? And it's all bullshit anyway. Sorry. Interviewer: No, but it's the same dilemma actually in Germany, when people are wanting to say something, knowing at the same time it's this intellectual stereotype, but on the other hand, you kind of forget about it.
  One of the things it causes is tension and unhappiness in people. I don't think it's very complicated, and I don't think I've named the only reason for it. The paradox is that that sort of tension and complication and conflict in people also makes them very easy to market to. Because I can say to you, 'Feeling uneasy? Life feels empty?' 'Well, here's something you can buy or something you can go do.' The economics term is inelasticity of demand. I demand all the time, no matter what the price of it is. And it works really well in an economic way. Emotionally, spiritually, in terms of citizenship, in terms of feeling like a meaningful part, even of this country. Forget the world. I’m sure the US government's arrogance and disdain for the rest of the world is unpleasant, but it's also a natural extension of Certain cultural messages we send ourselves about ourselves work very well in some ways and make us very rich and very powerful.
  It's all complicated. Interviewer: So we are all somehow addicted to having fun, and even so-called serious literature ... it's that you don't want to make this effort anymore. Books that are serious also have to be very entertaining, and you don't want to be bored. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcq8pf3z1ervkypy7ht216))
- I think, twenty, thirty years ago, you could still read a book and it would be this kind of work to do, but you wouldn't think, "Well, I have to be entertained all the time." So how do we get out of this dilemma? Even for intellectuals, it has to be entertaining and not boring. I don’t know that ... I don’t know that ... I don’t know that I’d agree with the last part of what you said.
  There's a real split; it's interesting that you went and interviewed Crichton, because there's a real split in U.S. literature between commercial literature, novels like Crichton writes, Stephen King, Tom Clancy, and the other big names ... Grisham. Some of which are really pretty good, and they make a great deal of money, and there's a whole lot of demand for them. And then there is still, and I think it's probably like this in ...
  Well, it's probably not quite ... There's probably more demand for serious books in Europe. But here there's a small pocket of probably, I don’t know, half a million ... say, a million readers, many of whom are from the upper classes and have good educations, and have been taught the pleasures of hard work in reading.
  Or music or art and like that. I mean, when you’re talking to me, you’re talking to somebody who doesn’t have very much power in the culture and who’s not very important except in a fairly small I don’t know what the analog would be. It would be something like maybe contemporary classical music in the US, which there are people who enjoy it and listen to it, partly because of training and partly because they are disposed to be willing to do a certain amount more work reading it. But compared to popular music and rock and roll and hip-hop, classical music is nothing. I mean, economically or commercially, or in terms of how many people have heard of it or how much of an influence it has on the culture. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcqep5r1yjyjwctz11cm68))
- And for me personally, I don’t know that it’s really ever been all that different. I think probably American education used to be a little bit better and a little bit more difficult, and children had no choice but to realize that there were certain things that were hard and involved a certain amount of drudgery, which were actually very satisfying at the end of it. But for the most part, I think in the U.S., people who have been doing “serious stuff,” which is harder and stranger, have always played to a much smaller audience.
  In terms of what can be done about the dilemma... First of all, I’m wondering who would care what I think, and second, I’m not sure. What do you think? I mean, you live in the same atmosphere I do. Interviewer: Yeah, I think it’s really a problem, of course. In Germany, they have this TV literary expert and he’s called “The Literary Pope.” So he’s the Pope of Literature.
  And people think he has a very good view of everything and he really knows. When he says, 'The book was good,' the book is good. Who is this guy? Interviewer: [Laughter] His name is Marcel Reich-Ranicki. Maybe you've heard of him? No. And he's a very funny guy and he’s maybe eight years old or something.
  And he always has this verdict on the book. So, the book is shit or ... He's part of your show? He's part of ... Interviewer: No, no, no. But he is just a figure and at the same time he always wants ... what he doesn't want the book to be is boring. By no means boring. And at the same time, he really understands a lot about books and he is really a good reader; but by saying all the time, 'Well, things are not supposed to be boring' … I think that’s really a mistake and it's getting taken for granted. I feel sometimes I also have this feeling that I don’t want to be bored, but on the other side, I see that’s not an option. I mean, I don't know; it's not right. I somehow have this feeling, even if it sounds stupid. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcqkcnks9v8aszfppa1q0t))
- No, it's ... There’s a difference though, I think, between being mildly bored. But then there’s another kind of boredom that I think you’re talking about. Reading requires sitting alone by yourself in a quiet room and I have friends, intelligent friends, who don’t like to read because they get - it’s not just bored - there’s an almost dread.
  That comes up, I think, here about having to be alone and having to be quiet. And you see that when you walk into most public spaces in America. It isn't quiet anymore. They pipe music through. And the music is easy to make fun of, because it's usually horrible music, but it seems significant that we don't want things to be quiet ever anymore.
  And to me, I don't know that I could defend it, but that seems to me to have something to do with when you feel like the purpose of your life is to gratify yourself and get things for yourself and go all the time; there's this other part of you that's the same part that's almost hungry for silence and quiet and thinking really hard about the same thing for maybe half an hour instead of thirty seconds that doesn't get fed at all.
  It makes itself felt in the body and a kind of dread in here. I don't know whether that makes a lot of sense, but I think it's true that here in the U.S., every year the culture gets more and more hostile. I don't mean hostile like angry. It becomes more and more difficult to ask people to read or to look at a piece of art for an hour or to listen to a piece of music that's complicated and that takes work to understand, because - well, there are a lot of reasons - but because, particularly now in computer and internet culture, everything is so fast.
  And the faster things go, the more we feed that part of ourselves, but don't feed the part of ourselves that likes quiet. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcqs7syfvyy4qmf197nxn8))
- That can live in quiet. That can live without any kind of stimulation. It's an American idiom, "going to hell in a handbasket." Things are getting worse and worse and worse. When we're saying it, are we just saying exactly what people our age said a hundred years ago? There's no way ever to know how different we are. Things seem different. Interviewer: Yeah, you never get this distance to yourself to really know.
  Now I don't know what I wanted to ask anymore. So, there was an episode in "Brief Interviews with Hideous Men," where it was also about this depressed person— You like talking about this story, don't you? Interviewer: Yeah, I do, actually. No, it's alright. Interviewer: [Laughter] Is that bad? No, it's fine.
  Interviewer: And there was something I read that happens to me very often. I have a friend, and she has multiple sclerosis. Yeah. Interviewer: And that's a very bad thing for a young woman. That's no fun. Interviewer: No, definitely. And she calls me and as soon as I pick up the phone, she instantly begins to talk about her sickness and what she takes and about going to the hospital.
  Now is this part going to make it onto the interview? Are we going to hear this part? Interviewer: No.
  No. Okay. That's what I figured. Alright. Keep going. [Camera man and interviewer laugh] Keep going. Interviewer: Everything I say is not going to make it on anyway. Fine. Okay. Interviewer: Don't worry about that. Great. Great... Great, great, great, great. [Camera man and interviewer derisively laugh at David] Interviewer: But I thought you wanted to have a conversation? Yes. Yes. No, this is fine. I'm just wishing — this is good. Camera Man: I mean, they can hear, but it's not making it to the show. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcqymxabw2ndy6h1z9ckvy))
- [Interviewer continues cackling] Alright. Interviewer: So, she calls me, and at that moment I hear her, I think, "Oh shit, okay." The next couple of hours are gone because she's telling me all that stuff. And on one hand, I know she has really got to get that out, and it's somehow my duty, because I like her, to hear that. But on the other hand, I think of my own free time and I thought, well, I was just sitting here, and now I have to hear all that stuff. And afterwards, when it's over, I think, well, it’s good that I... you know. Yeah. Imagine though, if she called you up late at night, and talked to you for two hours, and it was mostly apologizing for bothering you. So that's just one more layer of frosting, which is just something that goes along with kind of a depressive temperament. So there’s a lot of narcissism in self-hatred. Interviewer: Yeah, but what I was thinking is, what is so bad about me? What's wrong with me? That I hear her name, and I think, "Oh shit, again." That happened to me. I shouldn't have picked up the phone.
  And that's also part of the problem. Because, on the other hand, that is something I have to do. Yeah, but it's also— I mean, it's not ... Well, no. Now we're in this conversation and I'm going to be talking about your specific thing. This doesn't get used, right? No, but it's just kind of ... I don't think you're a bad person for ... I have a friend who's not sick, but lost her mother, sister, and father to cancer, all within three years. And then her best friend died of AIDS in San Francisco. This woman had the most terrible two or three years of anybody I've ever heard of.
  Pretty good friend of mine. My heart would sink every time ... because it was always painful. And she didn't complain about it. You know, she was doing really well, but still, I like things to be pleasant. I'd rather drink my chocolate milk and read a comic book than hear about unpleasant stuff. But this ... The depressed lady just has another spin on that.
  Which is that she's so worried about that feeling you have of dread that she's calling, that she's going to try to get in there, and hate herself for it before you can, and there's a great deal more narcissism in her. I didn't like her very much. Interviewer: Yeah, I have a feeling ... It's usually really bad not to like the main character of a story.
  And I haven’t done many where I didn’t, but this one I didn’t like. So that’s why I smiled. Everybody asked me about the story and it’s like the one I don’t want to talk about. But it’s fine. It’s fine.
  Interviewer: No, no. I also found that he didn’t like her, but nevertheless the story is— But she didn’t like herself either. She would’ve predicted that I didn’t like her. Interviewer: Right. [Chuckles uncomfortably] So, do you still watch TV? I mean, do you still watch TV? I don’t have a TV. Because if I have a TV, I will watch it all the time.
  So there’s my little confession about how strong I am at resisting stuff. I watch TV over at friends’ houses and stuff sometimes. I don’t watch as much as I used to.
  Interviewer: Yeah, but in "Infinite Jest," the entertainment is not coming from TV directly, but it’s coming from the noise. I thought more from those cartridges that you order and get all the time. But is the entertainment in "Infinite Jest" like TV as in America today? Is it somehow similar? I don’t know what you mean by TV. There’s network TV and there’s cable TV, and there’s satellite TV where we can get 500 channels. Then there are movies and various things available on both tape and DVD.
  And so, the phenomenon of TV, the stuff you can look at when looking at a TV is probably not all that dissimilar. My memory in "Infinite Jest" is that there was some complicated setup where they would sometimes broadcast things and then sometimes deliver it to you on a cartridge. You would have to let me go look. I don't remember very well. Interviewer: Yeah, that's right. There are things about the book that are probably not economically all that realistic. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcr4gmnn0cx8azjhcd9rps))
- Interviewer: Yeah, but, I mean, it’s just, all the people in the book wanted to reach a similar state of mind, like something, like amnesia. If people were doing drugs and people who are using entertainment, there was one woman who did something to herself and she said, "I didn’t want to hurt me, but I didn’t want to get hurt anymore." I just wanted all this stuff to stop.
  Is this a similar goal which people want you to reach in similar ways? Sort of amnesia or self-forgetting? Sure, I guess. Part of the allure of both drugs and entertainment is escape from my problems and my life, and having to be stuck in here. I can pretend I’m James Bond or someone. It just seems fine over the short haul. As a way of life, it doesn’t work all that well, though, no?
  Interviewer: No, but in your book - I don't ... Interviewer: There are a lot of people doing drugs. They don’t have to feel those things anymore. Yeah, well, stop me if I'm wrong, but... Because again, like I said, you know I did this thing like seven years ago. Interviewer: You just say what you think about it. I don’t quite get the question, because it seems to me the parts of the book that have to do with drugs mostly focus on this halfway house where people who have been doing drugs for ten years kind of stop and then sort of lose their minds because all of a sudden they are starting to feel some of this stuff.
  So, if you’re talking about the more general allure of drugs, to the extent that I understand it, which is about as specifically as I’m going to talk about it, it seems to me to be, and this isn’t a very original thing to say, it’s a pretty natural extension of corporate capitalist logic. I want to feel exactly the way I want to feel, which is good for exactly this long, and so I will exchange a certain amount of cash for this substance.
  And I will do it, but it's all a lie, because the control gradually goes away, and it stops being that I want to do it; it becomes that I feel I need to do it. That shift from "I want something" to "I feel I need it" is a big one. Yes? I mean ...
  Most of the problems in my life have to do with my confusing what I want and what I need. I was just having this very simplistic notion. What most people want to reach is this state of flawlessness, not having to think anymore. And I just wanted to know if there are several ways to reach this state of mind while watching entertainment all the time. Are you talking about entertainment in general or the entertainment in the book?
  In the book and also when I turn the TV on here, it really drives me crazy because I see a little piece, and then it's a commercial break. Then they show me something, and then I'm supposed to watch the longer part, but I've already seen the longer part, so there's no use in doing that. So it drives me somehow mad. Yeah. This all creates this kind of state of if I do it every day and so now it may be ... Well, particularly if you have a remote control. See, when that happens, you go to a different channel and if you don't like that channel, you go to a different channel. And one of the reasons I can't own a TV I’ve started having this thing where I become convinced there's something really good on another channel and that I’m missing it.
  And so instead of watching, I’m scanning anxiously back and forth for this thing that I think I want, that I don’t even know what it is. And so, I don’t know whether a similar thing happens in Germany, but it’s very stressful now. What it is, is too much good stuff combined with my sick little head that thinks there’s always something a little better on the next. And all you have to do. You don’t have to get up now to change it. That was the problem when it became easy. You just had to move your thumb and change it. That’s when we were screwed.
  Interviewer: So do you think it’s ... Ninety percent of this is going to be cut out, right? Interviewer: Yeah, sure. Yes? Okay. [Awkward interviewer laughter] Interviewer: I mean, not because I like it, but because, you know -- Because it’s not going to make any sense. Yes, right. Right. Interviewer: Yeah. So, do you think that entertainment... Is entertainment something we have to fight against? See, it’s a strange question, see, it’s a strange question. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcrcy7n2b7c15j796e2rxw))
- Because who would say entertainment is bad? I mean, I wouldn’t say entertainment is bad. But a model of life in which I have a right to be entertained all the time seems to me not to be a promising one. Right? And this won’t translate, but of course one of the insidious aspects of it is that entertainment is so entertaining.
  Imagine this show were running on American TV and I were sitting in this hotel watching it. Okay, we get this pointy-headed nerdy guy talking about this stuff or I’ve got, you know, Pamela Anderson running on a beach or hilarious comedy. Which one am I going to watch? You know, there’s no ... If fighting against entertainment is even required, how does one do it, unless Well, there are two options: One is you direct the attack only to people who are willing to listen to the complexity. But those aren’t the people who are enslaved by entertainment anyway. Or you find some way to make the attack on entertainment entertaining, in which case you’ve been captured by the very thing you’re fighting against. It’s very strange.
  Interviewer: Yeah, that’s exactly the dilemma. Yes. Interviewer: That’s exactly it. This is different; the topic is different now. "Infinite Jest" takes place in a tennis academy and you have been, I read, a tennis player.
  I'm a quite good tennis player. A somewhat good tennis player, not quite good. I played a lot as a kid. Yes.
  Interviewer: And then you said once, 'Well, tennis was a little bit like chess and boxing.' I don't know if it's a combination of the two, but you somehow related the three together: tennis, boxing, and chess. What makes tennis so special? If you're asking why it's in the book, the reason it's in the book is that it's the one sport I knew well enough to be able to talk about why it was beautiful.
  It's also a sport that has to do with two very bounded spaces and sending stuff back and forth between them, which relates to other themes in the book. I think tennis is a very beautiful sport, because it's very abstract, geometrical, and tactical like chess. It's also very physical.
  There's a lot of running; you get very tired playing. I don't know about the boxing thing unless it's just usually one person against another person.
  Interviewer: And chess? Well, if you're really interested, really good tennis players, like really good chess players, are always thinking four or five moves ahead. Actually, this was something that some of the German players, who were superstars in the nineties, were very good at doing.
  Boris Becker didn't just come up and hit an ace. What Boris Becker—and I think he'd learned this from McEnroe— was really good at hitting the forcing serve that made you hit a weak return that let him come into the net and put the next shot away. So everything is being thought of ahead, but it's also very combative. If you and I are playing, if I win, you lose. I'm trying to beat you very individually. I don't feel like this is making any sense at all. Interviewer: It does.
  Okay. Okay. Interviewer: I'm sorry, but— No, no. Okay, fine. Well, you can run some sort of editing magic. Interviewer: Yeah, sure, but I don't have to. But there's also something about— It's also combat at a distance. In boxing, the two bodies are very close to each other. There's something a little colder about tennis, which is, I'm trying to beat you, but you're 75 feet away from me and what's traveling between us is just this small thing. There's something more abstract about it which is a little bit more like chess. Interviewer: And you also said it's more mathematical, right? There was... I think there was... Are you talking about the essay that talks about calculus and tennis? Interviewer: No. Maybe I didn't understand it, Hal talks—no, was it Mario who talks to this guy? ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcrkp69xmetef42cfwvn51))
- His name is Schtitt? Schtitt! Schtitt? Yeah. I think he says that. A German, as I recall. Interviewer: Yeah. But that's not a German name, actually. No, of course it isn't. What it is, is a vaguely Germanic sounding name to Americans. Yeah, he's not the subtlest character in there. Well, the angles are mathematical. So I don't know.
  Interviewer: So, what is literature able to do that other things can't do? Interviewer: So, what is literature able to do that other things can't do? I saw this on the sheet of paper. Interviewer: Yeah, because I had to ... Good. Good. So let me ask you first, and then I'll ... What is it that literature can do that other things can't do? It's not so easy, is it? Interviewer: No, no. Not at all. But I thought that, you know, you're more intelligent than I am. Well, actually, I read in this interview and you said something, that good art somehow is able to not make you feel alone. That is something actually that I'm very addicted to. Because, simple as I am, I'm very happy when I don't feel so lonesome when I read something. And also, good literature? Literature is something very musical to me. I had that with Bernhard very much, because the sicker he got in his life, the easier the words became. And it was like some kind of music.
  So, for me, the beauty of the words and the musicality of it, along with the philosophical aspect, helps me not feel alone. Why don't we just put that in? That's a better answer to the question than I could have given. Interviewer: No, no. First, I had to answer. Well, play back the tape of what she said, and I'll just - no. It's a heavy question. There’s something musical about it, because it relates to patterns of meaning that develop over time. There's something about reading that isn't like looking at a piece of art, because I choose how long I look and what I look at.
  I’m being directed through a linear flow of time. But in a piece of music or a movie, that flow is directed for me. I've got no choice but to follow it. Whereas with books, it's different. I’m moving through time as I read, but I can also, I don't know if you do this, but if I've read a paragraph I like a lot, I go back and read it over again. So I’m trapped in time, but I’ve got more mobility within that time. And then I think ... There are other writers I’ve talked to about this, and most of us who end up doing this liked to read as kids, probably for the same reason you did. I’m trying to think of a way to say it that doesn’t sound stupid or simple, but it goes without saying that ... There are four of us in this room. I’m sure we all seem fairly pleasant. There are big limits on what we'll ever know.
  Like I don't know what's in your mind right now. God knows I don't know what's in his mind right now. There's a way for me — I'm talking more as a reader — that when I'm reading something that's good and that's real, I'm able to jump over that wall of self and inhabit somebody else in a way that I can't. You know, that we can't in regular life. And when I do inhabit that other person, very often what they're thinking or saying or feeling are things very much the way I do, but I'm scared there's something wrong with me that I do and nobody else does.
  There's a tremendous reassurance about that kind of communion and empathy. And then it gets more complicated because I'm also getting access to the mind of the author in a way that we don't have access to each other talking this way. Most of the friends I've got, and most of my friends don't like to read. Most of the friends I've got who don't like to read find it, A) boring, and B) just kind of lonely and slow. And I just don't get it because watching television for me, although it's easier, is much lonelier. Watching flat images on a flat screen doing interesting things and often they're very easy to look at is very different from knowing what it's like to be inside somebody else's skin or knowing what it's like to be able to spend two hours with an author who somehow can make me feel like I know what it is. I mean, it just seems like a form of magic to me.
  Interviewer: And is it also comfort?
  I can't remember which American writer it was. I heard him speaking. He said that his job is to comfort the disturbed and to disturb the comfortable. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcrvvsvgj3fe9pjqvqkt4d))
- And so there's something comforting about being able to inhabit somebody else, but there's something also very uncomfortable about it, because usually the experiences that person is having are just the ones that I don't like or that I haven't worked out.
  And it seems to me that the biggest split isn't between music and literature or music and sculpture, whatever. They're forms of art that offer us escapes from ourselves and our daily lives. And I think that's fun in small doses.
  And then there are kinds of art that offer us more confrontation with our own lives. I don't think it's surprising that there isn't as much demand or as much money in the latter, because it's more difficult and less pleasant sometimes.
  It takes skill and education to get good enough at reading or listening to be able to derive pleasure from it. There's class stuff involved here that gets very tricky. But I think it's worthwhile. I think reading and writing are both worthwhile.
  That's very profound. [Laughter] I did good for a while in the middle there. That was lucid. All I did was parrot back what you said.
  Interviewer: No, you didn't. But I took like ten times as long.
  And I did this [hand gestures] a lot more. Boy, is it hot in here now. Interviewer: Yes, it is. [Laughter] Camera Man: Oh yeah. Interviewer: So we are right into something that I actually have ... Do you want me to get you some water or something? No, I’m fine. I’ll just be sweating here in my chair. It's fine. Not a problem. Interviewer: The typical American. Yes, the sweaty American. I'm proud to sweat on behalf of the USA.
  [Laughter] Interviewer: So we were just in the middle of a question that I put on this paper which was somehow faxed, and which I received. Interviewer: That's good to know. The fear of the writer. That his work and his persona, somehow, made banal, be flattened, and abused, as soon as the media - I don't recall that. Where's that written down there? Interviewer: Here. Banal? Interviewer: Yeah, I don't know if that's - Oh. Okay. Interviewer: "Banalized". I think I made this word up? How interesting. See, mine stopped here. Interviewer: Really?
  Yeah. There wasn't any of this stuff. Interviewer: Oh my God. No, it's fine. So, we're talking about the marketing of writing stuff? Interviewer: No, but I mean... The fear of the writer that his work and his persona are somehow made into banal—well, not only that, but it belongs to promoting.
  The work and his persona are the same thing? Interviewer: No, no, no. But they're both made... Interviewer: Yeah, but, you know, when you're out there for the media, what happens then? I see a paradox here. I'm going to talk about the difficulties of having to deal with the media, but I'm talking to the media. See, I'll pretend I'm talking to you, but when this shows, you're going to have this face, sweaty face, on camera, talking about how difficult it is, as a writer, to be on camera, in which case, if I were the viewer, I would go, 'So why is the son of a bitch on camera?' So, how do you suggest I handle this?
  Interviewer: Yeah. No. It's a paradox, but at the same time, I think it's very... I mean, it's a legitimate fear to have. I think about these things all the time. I think, well, I like literature, but at the same time, why am I doing this? And how am I doing this? And how can I try to preserve these things?
  So, you know, it's a paradox for me too. For this reason, I think it's something you can think about. Sure. Well, there are a number of trade-offs. In the United States, there's another division between corporate publishers and non-profit publishers, who are often very small and do a lot of poetry and avant-garde fiction. If you are "lucky," these are square quotes, if you are lucky enough to be published by a corporate publisher, you get more exposure, you get reviewed in the New York Times instead of just your local newspaper, you get translated into other languages. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcs3dmf8paqq47mnc1hsj7))
- But literary stuff loses money for corporate publishers almost all the time. One of the ways they try to keep from losing money is by marketing this stuff. For reasons that everyone has tried to explain to me, but I still don't understand, having the author go around and talk and read— the thing they most like to do is send you to a bookstore and you give a reading at a bookstore. There are maybe 200 people there, but while you're in town to do the reading for the bookstore, you talk to the local newspaper and maybe do something like this. And that generates free advertising for the book.
  My problems with it are the following: I don’t feel like my stuff is meant to be read out loud. It's not supposed to live on the breath. There isn't enough punctuation in it. And I don't feel like I read it out loud very well.
  And B), I find that when there's a question-and-answer session, like you and I are having, although you and I are having a much more lengthy one, particularly with a newspaper reporter or a question-and-answer at the end of a reading, the question is easy to answer if it’s dull or stupid. The good questions are those that can’t be answered in a Q-and-A format, right? They’re the questions where you would have to sit down with a pot of tea or a pot of coffee. There are things that can be answered only in conversation between two people.
  And so I always feel vaguely fraudulent. There’s a thing about doing this where you’re helping me. We’re pretending we’re having a conversation. And I’m also pretending that there aren’t cameras all over here, but in fact this is all on TV, and I know that I’m supposed to ignore, I’m not supposed to look at the camera, because that doesn’t make for a good interview. But trust me, when I’m sitting here, the camera is the thing I really see. It’s all very strange. And so... So why do I do it at all? I make a variety of deals. And I do a few things. I know some writers who like this.
  And there are things about it — it's very flattering. You guys came. It makes me nervous and it makes me self-conscious to try to talk about stuff that I find almost impossible to talk about. Or else just to go, 'So, how long are you in town?' 'Oh, three days.' But I have an agent whom I owe 25,000 favors to. He's done all of these nice things for me. And it's also exciting for a writer to get his work published in another country, she says.
  This German publisher is really good. They're going to publish the book well, even though I don't think my English can really be translated into German because it's very idiomatic. Great advertisement, I'm sure.
  And all they need — they need this one thing from you to help them sell enough books maybe so that they don't lose money on it. It then becomes very difficult to say no.
  On the other hand, I don't think it's very good. I don't think it's good. Maybe a show like this? There's no analog for this in the U.S., but the whole going around and reading in bookstores thing, it's turning writers into kind of penny-ante or cheap versions of celebrities. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcsc0qvcjj556syddprark))
- People aren't usually coming out to hear you read; they're coming out to see what you look like and see whether your voice matches the voices in their head when they read. And none of it's important.
  It's icky. I don't know if there's a German translation for "icky". In terms of "banal", I don't know. To me, "banal" means general, simplistic, superficial, and vapid.
  If you do work like this, you pay certain prices. You don't make as much money. Not as many people read your stuff. But people who are reading it and are interested in it, you're pretty sure ... The thing that I like about doing this kind of stuff is that I'm pretty sure my readers are about as smart as I am.
  I think if you're somebody like Crichton or someone who's a Harvard M.D., but you're writing for a mass audience, things get very strange. I don't worry that people who are reading my stuff are misunderstanding it. Or "banalizing" it any more than it's already banal.
  I do worry, weirdly, about when it's translated into languages that I don't know. I worry that I don't know what's in there. There are so many American idioms in there that I don't know whether they can be translated or not. Interviewer: That's very hard to do, to translate it, actually.
  The people who did it, who translated your work in German, are really people who are very much into it, you know. I know some of them. Oh, no. I mean, that's good to hear. And you can understand, I can believe you, and still, there's this weird ... there's this weird ...
  Because one of the things about... You're probably like this about your work too. The term is "control-freak". You know, I want to control every single word that's on there. And so, it's just tough. The one language I can read, I read the translation, and it was just so different from anything I meant, that I've decided that it was just better to have it be done in languages I don't know. Is that any kind of answer to the question? Interviewer: Yeah, sure. Sure.
  One thing that also very much appealed to me is when you spoke in an interview about existential loneliness. I said the word "existential loneliness"? Interviewer: Yeah. Something like that. Okay. Interviewer: You know, I'm German. Sometimes I get things right and wrong. No, no, no. Okay... Interviewer: And that's something very much I like to hear an author say, because in the things I read, that's one thing I'm searching for, these testimonies of existential loneliness.
  So, is that something you still relate to? Or... Well, yeah. If I understand your question, this is the stuff we were talking about two questions ago. There's something painful about being stuck in a body and a consciousness that can't ever, except through conversation, can't ever be inside anybody else's. And there is a magic about... Except, see, I don't know that much about music. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcsj6wx5eeezv2szzt9m51))
- People who say that there is a purity with which the composer's emotional state can be felt by the listener that can't be approached by anything else either. Probably, most kinds of art have this magical thing of, for a moment, there is a kind of reconciliation and communion between you and me that isn't possible in any other way. But it's also the sort of thing that's so weighty and so general, that, especially after he used the word, "pontificate", I feel ...
  Interviewer: What does it mean? I have never heard it. The word, "pontificate"? To speak pompously about very complex, abstruse matters. It's a little bit pejorative. But he meant it in a funny way. But it's, I mean, it's ... This is something else about being an American. When I hear the word, "existential", now, half of me rolls my eyes, 'Oh, what a big sexy philosophical term.' And it becomes hard to speak seriously about it, because all I can hear is being made fun of for how serious, boring, and dull I'm being. If that makes any sense. Good luck editing.
  Camera Man: We're switching tapes. Your German accent's much better than mine. How surprising. Interviewer: Yeah, really. Interviewer: In Germany, when I'm talking about my generation, people in my profession, most of the time, they have really good educations, And all this.
  There's also the feeling of not being able to do anything with it. You have pretty good conditions to start with, and then after that you think, well, what's next? What am I doing with this? Maybe it's not reality, but you have the feeling of not doing anything with your life. And what do you think about that? I know that there's a paradox in the U.S. of the people who get powerful jobs, tend to go to really good schools, and often in school you study the liberal arts, philosophy, classical stuff, languages. And it's all very much about the nobility of the human spirit and broadening the mind.
  And from that, you go to a specialized school to learn how to sue people or to figure out how to write copy that will make people buy a certain kind of SUV. And yeah ... I don't know what I think about it other than that ... I'm not sure really that it's ever been all that different. I'm not sure really that it's ever been all that different. Because very few of us, and there are things about my job I don't like, but this is one of them that I do like, is that I get to use ... I get to use pretty much everything I've ever learned or think about. It's actually something that goes a long way when I complain. Sometimes it's lonely work and sometimes you worry it's not very good. I know that there is, at least in America, An entire class of members, and now, I'm talking about a very specific class here; I'm talking about upper and upper-middle-class kids whose parents could afford to send them to very good schools where they received very good educations.
  These kids are often working in jobs that are financially rewarding, but don’t have anything to do with what they were taught was important and worthwhile in school. And that is—I’ve never thought about it in those stark terms— that’s a bit of a paradox, isn’t it? When you guys talk about it, what do you conclude from it?
  Interviewer: That’s the thing; I don’t know what to conclude from it. I don’t know if it’s a phenomenon that has to do with a certain generation. A friend of yours, your age, who you were in school with, who’s a businessman now, would say that you are better off than he, because you’re at least getting to use a lot of the stuff that you studied in your actual work, right? Interviewer: Right. You know what? We could talk about it for a long time. I don’t know that I could say anything about it that would be interesting.
  From an on-camera point of view, my suspicion is that this has got something to do with something that was explained by original sin in Genesis, which is that, as we get older, we have to do things to get money, to stay alive, and there are things about that which often feel very wrong to us.
  It would be very nice if you cut that out, because that just sounds weird. I don’t know. Interviewer: Maybe this alienation is just part of it, you know? In your book, in "Infinite Jest", there are also people who, They don't want to grow up. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgcst8dz4dhs9y4k3fep3h7))
- And they feel alienated from what they started. And they say, well, we have done this and that. Well, we're not talking a Marxist alienation. We're not talking about alienation from the means of production. The thing of it is, though, at least in the U.S., this would be my guess, I doubt that somebody who went only to high school, which is the secondary school, and is working in a factory, I doubt he wakes up and goes, "Well, by gosh, at least I don't have all this humanistic learning I'm not using." I don't imagine he's any more satisfied or nourished inside by his job either.
  What you and I are part of is a class and generation that can be very articulate about what our complaints are and what we're feeling uneasy about. I think if there's something that characterizes our generation, it's not that we've come up with new problems or brilliant new solutions to them, but that we're endlessly verbal about it. Which is probably a start, at least being able to talk about it.
  Interviewer: Talking about this dilemma, wanting to be entertained and you just mentioned there was this big thing in America, a couple of days ago, and also this movement in a certain direction. And you asked me what I thought it was in ten, twenty years from now. So what do you think it will be like in a couple of decades from now in America? I mean, how will this go on? I don't know. I don't know. I'm scared.
  I don't know that I could say anything about the last couple of years that anybody else couldn't say. When I was younger, I used to think that some of the political and social answers were clear. There's a way in which we in America are very comfortable. And I thought that some of the political and social corrections I envisioned would happen when there was some sort of cataclysm or misfortune, when we weren't as comfortable anymore.
  The fact that we now have clear evidence that the way we live and the relationships we have with various other countries are causing some people to hate us so much that they want to kill us, and may succeed in killing a great many of us, frightens me only because ... When I was growing up, one of the mythological periods for us was the Great Depression. The Weimar era, where the story goes, everyone pulled together. There were hard times, and no one had enough, but everyone pulled together. It seems to me now that the country's reaction to feeling frightened and insecure is to buy Sports Utility Vehicles that are large, massive, and tank-like.
  They make individual people feel safer, but they also get four miles to the gallon in a country where gasoline is probably one-fifth as expensive as it ought to be. There's a sanity in Europe about gasoline prices and fuel consumption that there isn't here yet.
  And yet, we are voting for people who are deciding to go over and very possibly kill hundreds of thousands of civilians in order to kill a few enemies. None of which is important, but the fact that no one here is talking about the connection between how we live and what we drive and the things that are happening. The speed with which it's become, those bad people, those bad fanatics, they're evil. What they really hate is our freedom and our way of life, which is just hard to swallow, right? Who hates freedom? People hate people, not freedom.
  I now don't know what's going to happen. And I am, as an American, more scared than I've been since I was a little boy worrying about the U.S. and the Soviet Union having an intercontinental conflict. Not since that have I been this scared. And this is totally personal, but I'm more scared of us than I am of anybody else. That's a bleak place to be. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgct1jg4r4hkvany817y2yw))

- I'm not sure how I feel about ... Well, you're going to use it if you want. I don't think this is an evil country. I don't think American people are evil. I think we've had it very easy, materially, for a long time, and we've gotten very little help in understanding things that are important besides being comfortable. I don't think anybody knows how we will react if things get really hard here. The fact that we're strong militarily and economically is a good thing.
  But it's also a frightening thing. To some of us, as Americans. Luckily, not a lot of Americans will see this in Germany.
  Interviewer: Are there any means of rebellion? Sure. Interviewer: So, what would it be? Well, there are people doing it all over the place. I don’t know about people rappelling down buildings and getting tear-gassed and stuff. The people I know who are rebelling meaningfully don’t buy a lot of stuff. And don’t get their view of the world from television. And are willing to spend four or five hours researching an election rather than going by commercials.
  The thing about it is that in America, we think of rebellion as this very sexy thing and it involves action and force and looks good. My guess is the forms of rebellion that will end up changing anything meaningfully here will be very quiet and very individual. And probably not all that interesting to look at from the outside.
  I’m now hoping for less interesting, rather than more interesting. Violence is interesting and horrible corruption and scandals and rattling sabers and talking about war and demonizing a billion people of a different faith in the world.
  Those are all interesting. Sitting in a chair and really thinking about what this means and why the fact that what I drive might have something to do with how people in other parts of the world feel about me isn’t interesting to anybody else.
  That was very close to the truth, but I don't think it's going to make much sense. And plus, it's a little silly. I'm a writer. I'm not a politician or a political thinker. Just a scared little American living in California.
  Interviewer: Just one more question. Interviewer: Just one more question. Do you think there is a chance that we might get rid of this love for attractiveness? It's this visual thing. And you said rebellion is supposed to be attractive. People think it's attractive to take your gun and be this rebel. But the true rebellion is not supposed to be attractive, because it just isn't. So how do we get rid of all this visual ... It's weird to be saying this on television. It's weird to be saying this on television. There's something about ... there's nothing wrong ...
  It's not that there's anything wrong with being interested in stuff that's interesting and attractive. What it seems to be like here is television and corporate entertainment. Because it's so expensive, in order to make money, it has to appeal to a very wide audience. Which means it has to find things that a lot of people have in common. And I don't know about you, but here, I think, what most of us have in common are our very most base, uninteresting, selfish, stupid interests. Physical attractiveness. Sex. A certain kind of easy humor. Vivid spectacle. That's stuff that I will immediately look at, and so will you, and so will you.
  So it's in our very base and childish interests that we are a mass. The things that make us interesting, unique, and human tend to be wildly different between different people. So, my guess is... In terms of American mass culture, as a mass, for things to get significantly different, it's going to involve fragmentation in the entertainment industry.
  Something like what has happened in the American magazine industry, where instead of three or four magazines with millions of subscribers, you have thousands of magazines, each with a few thousand. That is, if entertainment can get more niche— N, I, C, H, E, is the English word— it's possible that these companies that put this stuff out can stay alive and make money without having to appeal to ten or twenty million people. Because I don't think that it's evil; it's just the way that it works. The only way to get ten or twenty million people all interested in the same thing is to pitch your appeal very, very low. Because maybe you're not interested in any of the things that I named, you know, just immediately, but I am. I'm no different than anybody else. I'm not, really. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01kfgct70tfzxrm4s3y6ggc9c0))
